URL: https://collabfund.com/blog/beautiful-vs-practical-advice/
TITLE: Beautiful Vs Practical Advice
AUTHOR_ID: 06
ARCHIVED: 2026-01-02T15:38:47.253084+00:00

---

heard a phrase recently: “Magazine architect.”

It’s a derisive term architects use for their colleagues who design buildings that look beautiful, grace magazine covers, and win awards, but lack functionality for the tenants.

Intricate roofs look amazing – and are notorious nightmares for leaking.

Oddly shaped buildings win awards – and offer little flexibility to remodel interior layouts.

Fancy materials glisten—but good luck finding someone skilled enough to maintain or replace them.

Ornate lobbies take up tremendous space – and are often not used by occupants, who enter through the garage.

The book How Buildings Learn writes that architects fancy themselves as artists, but people who occupy buildings do not want art; they want a building to work in:

Art must experiment to do its job. Most experiments fail. Art costs extra. How much extra are you willing to pay to live in a failed experiment? Art flouts convention. Convention became conventional because it works. Aspiring to art means aspiring to a building that almost certainly cannot work, because the old good solutions are thrown away. The roof has a dramatic new look, and it leaks dramatically.

The book cites renowned architects like I.M. Pei and Frank Lloyd Wright for designing buildings admired by everyone except their occupants, whose feelings tend towards frustration and disgust. Frank Lloyd Wright once said of his infamously leaky roofs: “If the roof doesn’t leak, the architect hasn’t been creative enough” – an amusing comment to everyone but those living in his homes.

The flip side is that office buildings with happy tenants tend to be big, boring, rectangles built with classic materials. They will win no awards and grace no magazines. But the roof is tight, the layout is flexible, and the HVAC system is located where it should be. The true purpose of a building – a place that helps you do your best work – is achieved.

I like art and can appreciate architecture. But the idea that there is a time and place for beautiful vs. practical should be recognized. And the idea that if you are looking for practical advice, beware hiring an artist whose goal is to be praised should be, too.

Is that true for many things in life?

Jason Zweig once wrote about investing:

While people need good advice, what they want is advice that sounds good.

The advice that sounds the best in the short run is always the most dangerous in the long run. Everyone wants the secret, the key, the roadmap to the primrose path that leads to El Dorado: the magical low-risk, high-return investment that can double your money in no time. Everyone wants to chase the returns of whatever has been hottest and to shun whatever has gone cold.

A lot of financial advice is beautiful and intelligent but has no practical purpose for the person receiving it.

It happens for a couple reasons.

One is that, like architects, financial professionals may want to further their career more than they want to help their clients. I think this is usually innocent: It’s easy to be blind to what your clients need when your business is so profitable and you’re gaining so much attention.

“Look how much money I’m making and how often I’m asked to come on TV” can be interpreted as “I am adding so much value.” Sometimes that’s true; often it’s not. An intense and complex derivatives strategy can make you sound brilliant and bring in buckets of fees, and also be the opposite of what a client actually needs. It’s telling that the company that figured out how to provide low-cost index funds – Vanguard – could only do it as a non-profit. There’s a mile-wide gap between what many clients need and what generates the most fees. A lot of people need the financial equivalent of a rectangle building but are sold a gorgeous geodesic dome with a leaky roof and no garage.

The other reason is that no two people are alike, and financial advice that’s useful for you could be disastrous for me and vice versa. There is no one-size-fits-all financial plan – a fact that’s easy to overlook because people want to think of finance like it’s physics, with clean formulas and absolute answers. When advice needs to be personal but you think it’s universal, it’s common to default to what sounds the best, the most intelligent, and the most complex. People drift from practical towards beautiful.

I watch financial markets every day because I think they’re a window into culture and behavior. They’re so fascinating, so beautiful, like art. But my personal finances are simple and boring. They will win no awards. But they’re practical for me and my family. They provide what I need them to do. Isn’t there beauty in that?

SHARE
