URL: https://markmanson.net/3-hard-truths-you-need-to-hear
TITLE: 3 Hard Truths You Need To Hear
AUTHOR_ID: 20
ARCHIVED: 2025-12-31T15:32:20.181895+00:00

---

Welcome to the realm of uncomfortable truths, where I, Mark Manson, will make you question everything you’ve ever believed in.

Buckle up, buttercup. Let’s dive into the rabbit hole of reality.

Truth #1: You’re Wrong About (Almost) Everything
One day, everything you believe today will be proven to be completely and utterly wrong or incomplete.

Remember the past you? The one with embarrassing beliefs and naïve ideas? Well, guess what, future you will look back at present you with the same cringe-worthy disgust.

The Lesson: Next time you’re absolutely sure about something, take a step back and ask yourself if it’s something you’ll be embarrassed about in a decade.

If yes, maybe shut the fuck up.

3 Ideas That Might Change Your Life
Never underestimate the power of an idea. Drop your email in the box below and I’ll send you three of them that might just change everything for you.

Email Address

Get Ebook
Your information is protected and I never spam, ever. You can view my privacy policy here.

Truth #2: Most People Aren’t Evil, Just Stupid (Including You)
Social media has made moralizing a sport, with people constantly judging each other as good or evil based on their ideas.

Enter Hanlon’s Razor:

Never attribute to malice what can be adequately explained by stupidity.

And now, Manson’s Addendum: pretty much everything you see or read is some degree of stupidity.

The Lesson: Combine these two principles, and you’ll see that we should reserve our moral judgments for only the clearest of situations.

Slow down on the judging, folks.

Truth #3: Care About People (And Show It)
George Vaillant’s study of Harvard graduates spanning 70 years revealed that the only consistent factor contributing to happiness and well-being is the quality of our relationships.

The secret? Learn to care about others and show them that you care.

The Lesson: The highest leverage skill you can build in your life is to care about people and demonstrate it. Cultivate strong relationships based on trust, intimacy, vulnerability, and mutual respect.

Remember, it’s all embracing the fact that we’re all a little bit stupid.

Manson, out.
