URL: https://markmanson.net/mastering-your-social-anxiety
TITLE: Mastering Your Social Anxiety
AUTHOR_ID: 20
ARCHIVED: 2025-12-31T15:32:33.938407+00:00

---

just posted my first YouTube video featuring a real-life person with a real-life problem: social anxiety.

Check it out if you haven't already.

Maybe you're like Melinda in the video and you've suffered from some form of social anxiety for most or even all of your life.

Well, today, we're going to do something about that.

Social anxiety, for many, is like that party crasher who shows up uninvited, wrecks the fun, and hangs around way too long. Whether you experience this discomfort occasionally or as a regular visitor, it’s time to learn how to handle it.

Here, I dive a little deeper into five proven strategies for managing social anxiety, complemented with practical exercises you can carry out on your own time.

It's important that you take your time with these exercises. Yes, you should feel a little uncomfortable when you're doing them—that's where real personal growth happens. But you shouldn't be pushing yourself to the point of having an anxious meltdown.

So do them at your own pace. If you ever feel like you need to step back and take a break, please do—just promise yourself you'll come back to working on this part of …

Hey, sorry to interrupt…
I know you were reading that and getting all into it, but I’ve got to stop you here for a second. Because you seem to have somehow stumbled onto a subscriber-only article, and I hate to say it, but this shit ain't free.

(Already a member? Log in here.)

See, I write a bunch of big, long, sexy articles for everybody, those are probably some of the articles that you know and love. They are big and beautiful and long and full of funny cat GIFs. But sometimes when I want to diverge into a niche topic or dive deep on a specific problem my readers are having, I write something exclusively for my subscribers. Like this one.

You can read this extra content yourself too. You just have to subscribe. It's easy and takes 60 seconds.

Support the site and get access to the following:

All the no-bullshit insights and new perspectives I have to offer. You get instant access to all articles on the site, including the 40+ exclusive subscriber-only articles.
6 core courses to improve your life:
Healthy Relationships - Find out why your relationships all fail or succeed in the way they do—and what you can do about it.
Emotional Mastery - Get a better handle on your emotions and learn how to channel them more productively in your life.
Resilience - Take on life’s most important challenges and live with tenacity and purpose.
Finding Purpose - Find a purpose that gives your life meaning and take action on the things most important to you.
Bonus: Social Connection - Learn how to connect more deeply with the people in your life, one conversation at a time.
Challenging Beliefs - Dig deep into your beliefs and figure out if they’re helping or hurting you in life.
Bonus: Overcoming Anxiety - Get down to the root of your anxieties and learn to overcome them, one painful step at a time.
Build a Better Life - Create an actionable plan to finally live the life you’ve always wanted.
Bonus: Healthy Dating - Get a solid grasp on the principles that make for a successful dating life and fulfilling relationships.
5 Awesome Ebooks, which go in-depth on topics like Self-Knowledge, Relationships, Habits and Happiness are instantly emailed to you after signing up.
Audio commentaries to my books, in which I talk in depth about my bestselling books like The Subtle Art of Not Giving a F*ck and Everything is F*cked.
Exclusive events and meet-ups like exclusive post-show meet-ups for members during my book tours.
Subscribing costs less than a cup of coffee in some places. And it’s what allows me to feed myself in between writing amazing shit for you. So please, feed me.
