URL: https://markmanson.net/the-one-rule-for-life
TITLE: The One Rule For Life
AUTHOR_ID: 20
ARCHIVED: 2025-12-30T13:33:02.305264+00:00

---

Depending on your perspective, Immanuel Kant was either the most boring person on the planet or a productivity hacker’s wet dream. For over 40 years, he woke up every morning at 5:00 AM and wrote for exactly three hours. He would then lecture at the same university for exactly four hours. He followed that up with lunch at the same restaurant each day. Then, in the afternoon, he would go on an extended walk through the same park, on the same route, leaving and returning home at the exact same time. Every day.

Kant spent his entire life in Königsberg, Prussia. I mean that literally. He never left the city. Despite the sea being an hour away, he never saw it.1

Kant was efficiency personified. He was so mechanical in his habits that his neighbors joked they could tune their clocks based on when he left his apartment each day. He would leave for his daily walk at 3:30 PM, have dinner with the same friend every evening, and return home to finish work and go to bed at exactly 10:00 PM.

It’s easy for us to scoff at a guy like this. What a dweeb. Seriously, get a life, dude.

But Kant was one of the most important and influential thinkers in modern history. He did more to steer the world from his single-room apartment in Prussia than most kings and armies ever did before and since.2

Table of Contents
Kant’s Legacy
The One Rule
The Moral Implications of Kant’s Rule
The Impact of Kant’s Philosophy
Kant’s Legacy

If you’re living in a democratic society that protects individual rights, you have Kant to partially thank for that. He was the first person to ever envision a global governing body that could guarantee peace across much of the world. He described space/time in such a way that it inspired Einstein’s discovery of relativity.3 He came up with the idea that animals could potentially have rights,4 invented the philosophy of aesthetics and beauty, and resolved a 200-year philosophical debate in the span of a couple hundred pages. He reinvented moral philosophy, from top to bottom, overthrowing ideas that had been the basis of western civilization since Aristotle.

Kant was an intellectual badass. If brains had balls, Kant’s would have been made out of steel. His ideas, particularly about ethics, are still discussed and debated in thousands of universities today.

And that’s what I want to talk about: Kant’s moral philosophy, and why it matters.

Now, I know what you’re saying. Really, Mark? Moral philosophy? Who fucking cares, man? Show me shiny sunset inspirational quotes and cat pics.

Well, that, right there, is moral philosophy. Any time you say, “Who cares?” or “What’s the big deal?” you’re essentially questioning the value of something. Is it worth your time and attention? Is it better/worse than something else? These are all questions of value, they all fall under the umbrella of moral philosophy.

Our moral philosophy determines our values—what we care about and what we don’t care about—and our values determine our decisions, actions, and beliefs. Therefore, moral philosophy applies to everything in our lives. Got it? Good.

Moral philosophy: Because if you have to ask, you probably need it.

Kant’s moral philosophy is unique and counterintuitive. Kant believed that for something to be good, it had to be universal—that is, it can’t be “right” to do something in one situation and “wrong” to do it in another. If lying is wrong, it has to be wrong all the time. It has to be wrong when everyone does it. Period. If it isn’t always right or always wrong, then that cannot be a valid ethical principle.

Kant called these universalized ethical principles “categorical imperatives”—rules to live by that are valid in all contexts, in every situation, to every human being.

Well, holy shit, universal laws that dictate all morality for every human being? Sure, want fries with that?

It’s so impossible, it sounds ludicrous. But Kant made a hell of an attempt. In fact, he made a number of attempts at creating categorical imperatives. Some of those attempts were quickly ripped to shreds by other philosophers. But others have actually held up the test of time to some degree.

One of them, in particular, has kind of stuck. And in all of my years reading and studying philosophy, psychology, and other sciences, it’s one of the most powerful statements I’ve ever come across. Its implications reach into every area of each person’s life. In a single sentence, it sums up the bulk of all of our ethical intuitions and assumptions. And in each situation, it points to a clear direction for how we should be acting and why.
